README.md, before:

# InfluxDB::Process

Gathers metrics from the Ruby process it is executed in and sends them to an InfluxDB database.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'influxdb-process'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or do all this at once:

    $ bundle add influxdb-process

## Usage

This library assumes that you already have a working InfluxDB client instance.
It does not attempt to create one for you.
If not, see [InfluxDB Ruby](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb-ruby) for client initialization instructions.
Let's say you have the client in the `influxdb` variable, as it says.

Add this to any place in your Ruby program:

```ruby
InfluxDB::Process::Instrumentation.new(influxdb)
```

When you deploy this, the process where this code is executed will create a new thread.
It will periodically collect process metrics and send them to InfluxDB via the provided client.

You can pass additional options to customize the behavior of this gem. Here they are (with default values):

```ruby
InfluxDB::Process::Instrumentation.new(
  influxdb,
  memory_series: 'process_memory',
  object_series: 'process_objects',
  interval: 10, # seconds
  process: $PROGRAM_NAME
)
```

Metrics will be tagged with process name.
By default, `$0`/`$PROGRAM_NAME` will be used.
You can set your own process name via an additional keyword argument in the constructor. For example:

```ruby
InfluxDB::Process::Instrumentation.new(influxdb, process: 'report_generator')
```

You can also set the `INFLUXDB_PROCESS_NAME` environment variable:

    INFLUXDB_PROCESS_NAME=cache_cleaner bundle exec ruby ...

It will take precedence over the keyword argument.

## Limitations

System memory metrics (total, resident, shared memory used by the process as seen from the OS) are read
for the `/proc` filesystem. They are not reported on systems where it is not available.

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies.
You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

How to test this gem:
* Install and run InfluxDB
* Create a `test` database in it
* Run `make`

It will generate metrics and push them to the `test` database.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`.
To release a new version:
* Update the version number in `version.rb`
* Run `bundle exec rake release`, which will do the following:
  * create a git tag for the version
  * push git commits and tags
  * push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org)

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/vassilevsky/influxdb-process

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

Divide initializer into separate methods
It was required to move metric collection code out of the separate thread to be able to see the exception it was throwing, in Ruby < 2.5.
But it also made the library more convenient: users can instrument whenever they want.

README.md, after:

# InfluxDB::Process

Gathers metrics from the Ruby process it is executed in and sends them to an InfluxDB database.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'influxdb-process'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or do all this at once:

    $ bundle add influxdb-process

## Usage

This library assumes that you already have a working InfluxDB client instance.
It does not attempt to create one for you.
If not, see [InfluxDB Ruby](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb-ruby) for client initialization instructions.
Let's say you have the client in the `influxdb` variable, as it says.

Add this to any place in your Ruby program:

```ruby
InfluxDB::Process::Instrumentation.new(influxdb).start
```

When you deploy this, the process where this code is executed will create a new thread.
It will periodically collect process metrics and send them to InfluxDB via the provided client.

Alternatively, you can instrument whenever you want (after each request / job / batch):

```ruby
# in an initializer, once
p = InfluxDB::Process::Instrumentation.new(influxdb)

# later, in an appropriate place, as many times as needed
p.instrument
```

You can pass additional options to customize the behavior of this gem. Here they are (with default values):

```ruby
InfluxDB::Process::Instrumentation.new(
  influxdb,
  memory_series: 'process_memory',
  object_series: 'process_objects',
  interval: 10, # seconds
  process: $PROGRAM_NAME
)
```

Metrics will be tagged with process name.
By default, `$0`/`$PROGRAM_NAME` will be used.
You can set your own process name via an additional keyword argument in the constructor. For example:

```ruby
InfluxDB::Process::Instrumentation.new(influxdb, process: 'report_generator')
```

You can also set the `INFLUXDB_PROCESS_NAME` environment variable:

    INFLUXDB_PROCESS_NAME=cache_cleaner bundle exec ruby ...

It will take precedence over the keyword argument.

## Limitations

System memory metrics (total, resident, shared memory used by the process as seen from the OS) are read
for the `/proc` filesystem. They are not reported on systems where it is not available.

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies.
You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

How to test this gem:
* Install and run InfluxDB
* Create a `test` database in it
* Run `make`

It will generate metrics and push them to the `test` database.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`.
To release a new version:
* Update the version number in `version.rb`
* Run `bundle exec rake release`, which will do the following:
  * create a git tag for the version
  * push git commits and tags
  * push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org)

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/vassilevsky/influxdb-process

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
